JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Donald Trump announces
more top appointments to his
administration,
and we take a closer look at the
president-elect's
potential conflicts with his
business interests.
Then, we explore the many ways
Mexico and
the U.S. are bound together,
despite the border.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Truly separating
these countries
is nearly impossible, given
their deep connections,
not only geographic -- I'm
standing in the
U.S., and everything beyond the
water is Mexico
-- but also intertwined
economies and families
who straddle the border.
Every day, more than a million
people cross
legally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, this week's
Leading Edge
looks at the science and
psychology behind
efforts to stop terrorist
attacks.
And looking at the long
tradition of presidents
pardoning a Thanksgiving Turkey.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: On this day
before Thanksgiving,
new Cabinet nominees from
president-elect
Trump that send a message of
diversity.
He announced his choices today
for United
Nations ambassador and secretary
of education.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: During the primaries,
South Carolina
Governor Nikki Haley was a
frequent critic
of candidate Trump, instead
backing Marco
Rubio.
Her State of the Union response
was seen as
an indictment of Mr. Trump.
GOV.
NIKKI HALEY (R), South Carolina:
During anxious
times, it can be tempting to
follow the siren
call of the angriest voices.
We must resist that temptation.
JOHN YANG: But that was then.
Now president-elect Trump has
picked her to
be his ambassador to the United
Nations, a
Cabinet-level post.
The daughter of Indian
immigrants is in her
second term as governor, the
first female
and first minority to hold the
office.
She drew praise last year for
her response
after an avowed white
supremacist killed nine
parishioners in a black
Charleston church,
and for leading the drive to
remove the Confederate
Flag from the statehouse, where
it had flown
for a half-century.
Haley's exposure to world
affairs is limited,
but she's attracted foreign
companies like
Volvo to South Carolina.
Announcing the pick, the
president-elect called
her "a proven deal-maker.
We look to be making plenty of
deals.
She will be a great leader
representing us
on the world stage."
That's a far cry from last
March, when candidate
Trump tweeted: "The people of
South Carolina
are embarrassed by Nikki Haley."
Today, Haley said in a
statement: "When the
president believes you have a
major contribution
to make, that is a calling that
is important
to heed."
Mr. Trump today also tapped
Michigan philanthropist
Betsy DeVos to be his nominee
for education
secretary.
She's never worked in public
education.
A big Republican donor and
one-time chairman
of the Michigan party, she is a
champion for
charter schools and school
vouchers.
She and her husband formed a PAC
to support
pro-voucher candidates
nationwide.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: Let us
give thanks for all that we
have.
JOHN YANG: Late today, the
president-elect
released a Thanksgiving message
appealing
for unity after a divisive
campaign.
DONALD TRUMP: This historic
political campaign
is now over.
But now begins a great national
campaign to
rebuild our country and to
restore the full
promise of America for all of
our people.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump and his
family are spending
the holiday at his Mar-a-Lago in
Florida.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There were
conflicting reports
today about whether Dr. Ben
Carson had agreed
to become secretary of housing
and urban development,
but a Carson spokesman said late
this afternoon:
"Nothing has been offered, and
no decision
has been made."
In the day's other news: Hillary
Clinton's
lead in the popular vote in this
year's election
has passed the two million mark.
As of today, Clinton has 64.2
million votes
in the nationwide tally.
President-elect Trump trails
with 62.2 million,
despite winning the Electoral
College.
The updated totals are due
largely to absentee
and provisional ballots that are
still being
counted in California.
That ongoing count in California
has approved
a ballot measure speeding up
death penalty
appeals.
State officials declared Tuesday
that Proposition
66 won 51 percent of the vote.
It's meant to cut down on the
number of years
that death row inmates wait and
ensure that
they are actually executed.
France accused Syria and Russia
today of exploiting
the U.S. political transition on
launching
all-out attacks on Syrian
rebels.
French officials pointed to
heavy bombing
of Eastern Aleppo, with
thousands there and
elsewhere cut off from food and
medicine,
and the French foreign minister
called for
an emergency meeting.
JEAN-MARC AYRAULT, French
Minister of Foreign
Affairs (through translator):
France is taking
an initiative to confront the
strategy of
total war by the regime and its
allies who
are taking advantage of the
uncertainty in
the United States to gather very
quickly the
group of friends of Syria in the
next few
days in Paris.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.N. special
envoy for
Syria joined in the concern.
Staffan de Mistura warned that
Syria's military
could launch a new offensive in
Aleppo before
president-elect Trump takes
office.
New clashes between Indian and
Pakistani forces
erupted today in disputed
Kashmir.
Tensions have been rising in the
region since
militants killed 17 soldiers at
an Indian
army base there in September.
Today, Indian units opened fire
along the
dividing line, hitting a
passenger bus and
killing 10 civilians.
The Pakistanis said they fired
back and killed
seven Indian soldiers.
In Britain, a jury convicted a
white supremacist
of murdering Labor Party
lawmaker Jo Cox.
She was shot and stabbed to
death a week before
Britain voted to leave the
European Union
in June.
Prosecutors said Thomas Mair's
home was full
of Nazi literature.
Back in this country, the long
Thanksgiving
travel weekend has begun, and
it's expected
to be the busiest in nearly a
decade.
Airports, railways and roads
filled today.
AAA predicted nearly 49 million
people will
venture at least 50 miles from
homes, due
in part to record-low gas
prices.
But police urged patience.
LANCE CPL.
DAVID JONES, South Carolina
Highway Patrol:
There's just so many motorists
that are going
to be traveling.
And oftentimes we see where
operators get
nervous or they get upset, or
road rage kicks
in because they're not getting
to their destination
quick enough.
Don't be that driver.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Heavy rain and
snow caused
delays in some places today, but
for the most
part, the weather wasn't an
issue.
The rate of abortions in the
U.S. has fallen
to its lowest point in decades.
The Centers for Disease Control
reports the
rate in 2013 was down 50 percent
from 1980.
The CDC cites the sharp decline
in teen pregnancies
and expanded contraception
coverage as likely
factors.
There's word that social media
giant Facebook
has built software to censor
material seen
by users in China.
The New York Times reports that
it's part
of an effort to gain reentry to
the country
after a seven-year ban.
A Facebook spokesman told The
Times that there
have no specific decisions, but
she said -- quote
-- "We have long said that we
are interested
in China."
On Wall Street, two new records
on a day of
light trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 59
points to close at 19083, a new
high.
The Nasdaq fell five points, and
the S&P 500
rose a point, also reaching a
new record.
And archaeologists think they
have solved
a longtime mystery, the exact
spot in Plymouth,
Massachusetts, where the
Pilgrims first lived
after they arrived from England
in 1620.
Scientists from the University
of Massachusetts-Boston
found calf's bones, musket balls
and ceramics
at a spot known as Burial Hill.
The artifacts were discovered
during a dig
this past summer.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
why the president-elect's
business past could create
problems for his
presidential future; how life on
the Mexican
border might change under a
Trump presidency;
using counseling instead of
prison time to
de-radicalize convicted
terrorists; and much
using counseling instead of
prison time to
de-radicalize convicted
terrorists; and much
more.
A deeper look now into one of
president-elect
Trump's key Cabinet picks today,
and again
to John Yang.
JOHN YANG: One of those choices
that immediately
drew a lot of attention was his
pick for education
secretary, Betsy DeVos.
It sends a number of signals
about what Mr.
Trump intends to do with his
education policy,
but it also raises some
questions.
Alyson Klein of Education Week
joins me now
to talk about this.
Alyson, thanks for coming.
Betsy DeVos, not necessarily
well-known nationwide.
Who is she and what does she say
or what does
her -- the pick say about a
Trump administration
on education?
ALYSON KLEIN, Education Week:
So, on the campaign
trail, Trump didn't talk much
about cases
-- about policy, but, when he
did, he talked
about school choice.
And Betsy DeVos is a longtime
school choice
advocate.
So we can expect that this
administration
is going to make good on its
promise to make
school choice a huge priority.
JOHN YANG: What can the federal
government
do on school choice?
ALYSON KLEIN: So, that's a great
question.
On the campaign trail, Donald
Trump proposed
taking $20 billion in federal
funding, which
is almost a third of the U.S.
Department of
Education's budget, and using
that for a school
choice program.
It's unclear if a proposal like
that could
actually pass Congress.
Senator Lamar Alexander, who
will actually
preside over Betsy DeVos'
confirmation hearing,
put forth a similar proposal
last year and
it just didn't get the votes to
clear procedural
hurdles.
So it's unclear if they will be
able to do
their grand vision on school
choice.
But certainly having somebody
like Betsy DeVos
talking about school choice from
the bully
pulpit of the Department of
Education could
really give some lift to the
issue in states
and districts.
JOHN YANG: Another thing that
Mr. Trump spoke
a lot about on the campaign
trail was Common
Core.
He is against it.
He doesn't like it.
What do we know about Betsy
DeVos' position
on Common Core?
ALYSON KLEIN: Well, she's
clarified her position
on Common Core today, saying
that she thinks
it's a federal boondoggle.
She's also said that she's in
favor of accountability
and local control.
Some school choice advocates had
actually
been worried that DeVos was a
Common Core
supporter because she's on the
board of Governor
Jeb Bush's organization, and
obviously Governor
Bush is quite a supporter of
Common Core.
But she made it clear today that
she stands
with Mr. Trump in opposing the
standards.
JOHN YANG: How does she compare,
her background
compare?
She was a philanthropist.
She was a chairman of the
Michigan Republican
Party.
How does her background and her
experience
compare with previous education
secretaries?
ALYSON KLEIN: It's unusual
background.
We have never that I can think
of really had
an advocate at the helm of the
department.
Our last couple education
secretaries, Secretary
John King, who is in the post
now, Arne Duncan,
Obama's first education
secretary, had both
worked in school districts, had
been -- John
King was the state chief in New
York.
Arne Duncan was a school
superintendent in
Chicago.
Other education secretaries,
like Lamar Alexander,
actually, have been governors.
So it's unusual to have somebody
who has primarily
been an advocate.
JOHN YANG: She's never worked in
public education.
She's never run a big
bureaucracy or a big
organization.
Is that what you're saying?
ALYSON KLEIN: Yes, that's
correct.
JOHN YANG: What's been the
reaction to her
being named as his nominee?
ALYSON KLEIN: Depends on who you
ask.
School choice advocates are
really excited
to have one of their own, one of
their champions
headed to the Department of
Education.
Teachers unions are really
unhappy with the
pick.
They picked up on what you
picked up on, that
she doesn't have a background in
a school
district.
And they are also opposed to
this idea of
vouchers, which they say siphon
off money
for public schools.
JOHN YANG: And that's been an
issue for some
time now in public education.
ALYSON KLEIN: Yes, absolutely.
The idea of creating a federal
school choice
program has been something that
Republicans
have wanted to do for a really
long time.
The closest they have come is a
voucher program
for the District of Columbia.
But with DeVos in the Education
Department,
they may really be able to that
vision further.
JOHN YANG: Any sense will she
have any trouble
getting confirmed, do you think?
ALYSON KLEIN: I would expect
not.
Senator Alexander put out a very
supportive
statement on her confirmation
today.
She's certainly donated to a lot
of Republicans.
And so they may really look upon
her appointment
favorably.
JOHN YANG: Alyson Klein helping
us understand
who Betsy DeVos is, thanks so
much for coming
in.
ALYSON KLEIN: Thanks for having
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One area of
uncharted territory
under a Trump presidency centers
on potential
conflicts of interests with his
businesses.
Yesterday, the president-elect
told The New
York Times, "The law is totally
on my side."
But recent meetings with some
current and
potential foreign investors have
raised new
questions.
We explore those now with
Richard Painter.
He's a University of Minnesota
law professor
who was President George W.
Bush's top ethics
attorney in the White House.
And Kenneth Gross, he's an
ethics law expert
who advised New York Mayor
Michael Bloomberg
when he went from businessman to
public official.
And we welcome both of you to
the "NewsHour."
I'm going to start with you,
Richard Painter.
When Donald Trump says the
president can't
have a conflict of interest, is
he right about
that?
RICHARD PAINTER, University of
Minnesota:
Well, no.
Of course the president can have
a conflict
of interest.
I mean, think about where we
would be today
if President Roosevelt had owned
the buildings
in Germany during the war or the
years leading
up to the war and large loans
from Deutsche
Bank.
You can have conflicts of
interest that are
very detrimental to the American
people.
You need a president who is
going to stand
up to foreign dictators, who is
going to focus
on the needs of the United
States, and the
need for peace in the world and
also strength.
And these conflicts of interest
are real.
Whether or not a specific
federal criminal
statute applies to the
president, which it
doesn't, even though it applies
to every other
executive branch employee, but
there are other
rules that do apply to the
president, including
the Emoluments Clause of the
Constitution,
which says the president cannot
receive payments
from foreign governments.
And that's something the Trump
Organization
needs to deal with, because they
have outstanding
loans from the Bank of China,
which is controlled
by the government of China.
And they have foreign diplomats
checking into
their hotels and renting the
expensive suites.
And that needs to be dealt with.
So the law does apply to the
president and
he can have conflicts of
interest, and he
needs to get rid of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kenneth Gross,
how do you see
that?
How clear are the rules, the
laws that apply
to the president?
KENNETH GROSS, Ethics Law
Expert: Well, what's
clear is that the domestic
conflict of interest
law doesn't apply to the
president.
That's the letter of the law.
What the ethics surrounding a
president and
what the conventions say he
should be doing
is a very different thing.
The Emoluments Clause, as
Richard has mentioned,
which is this gift provision
from the original
Constitution, but is alive and
well today,
does apply, but the application
of that is
not so clear.
You know, what sort of foreign
corporations
would come into play?
Are they really owned by a
foreign government
and exactly is what an
emolument?
Is it just a payment or does it
actually have
to be a benefit...
JUDY WOODRUFF: A kind of
benefit.
KENNETH GROSS: ... if it's a
commercial transaction?
So, yes, there are issues of
interpretation
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Painter,
what do you
say Donald Trump needing to do
in order to
remove any question of a
conflict of interest,
given his significant and
widespread holdings?
RICHARD PAINTER: Well, I think
the first step
is to make sure that he complies
with the
Constitution, and he does need
to address
the emoluments issue.
And I have suggested to his
transition team
that they ought to have an
assignment over
to the United States government,
an assignment
of any and all payments from
foreign governments
that are covered by the
Emoluments Clause.
That is an answer to the problem
of a gift
from a foreign government.
You can give it to the United
States government.
He could do that today with a
simple assignment
of those payments, plus an audit
that would
take place every year to make
sure we swept
them all out.
That's the bare minimum.
And I think the Electoral
College ought to
insist on that before voting,
just as they
would want to see a birth
certificate if that
were at issue or anything else.
That's important
constitutionally.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Painter,
let me just
stop you right there, because I
want to make
sure what everybody understands
what this
emoluments business is.
So, what we're talking about is
anything that
would benefit Donald Trump's
businesses, being
sure that doesn't benefit --
doesn't interfere
in any way with the U.S.
government.
KENNETH GROSS: Yes.
As well as I can define this...
RICHARD PAINTER: Well, no,
that's too broad.
That's too broad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK.
KENNETH GROSS: OK.
OK.
So, what we have here is a
provision in the
Constitution that says you
cannot receive
a present, meaning a gift.
Then there is this question of
emolument.
It clearly applies to someone
who works in
the National Institute of Health
that wants
to work for a foreign
government, because
he's providing a service.
And if he gets a payment for
that, that raises
questions under emoluments and
has to be dealt
with by the Department of
Justice.
If there's a commercial
transaction, a foreign
government is paying rent into a
place that
they're renting that is owned by
Mr. Trump,
the president of the United
States, that -- I
have not seen the emolument
provision applied
in quite that situation.
It's not a service.
It's a commercial transaction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, without
getting too much
in the weeds here in the few
minutes that
we have, Richard Painter, how do
you see -- again,
what are you saying that Mr.
Trump needs to
do?
RICHARD PAINTER: Well, if those
are above-market
rents or they're below-market
interest rate
loans from the Bank of China, I
think those
are presents, just like any
other present.
But the point is that he could
right now assign
over to the United States
government anything
covered under the Emoluments
Clause of the
Constitution, and we can sort
out later what
it is, pursuant under audit.
And that needs to be done before
the Electoral
College vote.
The broad issue can be addressed
by divesting
himself of all of his assets
through an initial
public offering or some other
way to convert
the assets to cash.
Many American families do that
when they want
to move on from their business.
And, here, there's a very good
reason to move
on.
He's going to become the
president of the
United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Ken Gross,
he has talked
about putting his assets in what
is called
a blind trust that his children
would run.
Would that take care of what
we're talking
about?
KENNETH GROSS: It really
doesn't.
It's not a blind trust, first of
all.
He knows what he put in it.
In order for it to be a true
blind trust,
he would have to liquidate his
assets first.
That is not realistic in any
kind of short
period of time.
I don't know about going public
with everything.
That's not so easy either.
So, I understand that most his
assets are
illiquid, and they don't all
create conflicts
of interests.
I think -- I agree that you need
to look internationally
first.
But having a trust with your
children in charge
doesn't meet the requirements of
blind trust,
if he were required to meet
those requirements,
which he's not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Painter,
just quickly,
how much of this is complicated
by the fact
that we don't know publicly what
Donald Trump's
business interests are?
He has not released his tax
returns.
He has made a financial
statement, but a lot
of this is not public
information, is it?
RICHARD PAINTER: No, it's not.
And I urged him to release the
tax returns
during the campaign, but he
decided not to
do that, even though every other
candidate
has and every president.
But, going forward, I think the
answer here
is for him to sell these
business interests,
take the company public or come
up with some
other answer.
It will leave him with a few
billion dollars
to give some to his kids, and
put the rest
in a blind trust, and be a good
president.
And he made this decision that
he wants to
be a president, rather than a
businessman.
And now that he's made that
decision and he
won, it's time to do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Ken Gross,
just quickly,
is that what he has to do, sell
it all off
and...
KENNETH GROSS: I'm not going
that far, because
it's not realistic.
I think, internationally,
though, that's where
the primary focus should be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kenneth Gross,
Richard Painter,
we thank you both.
RICHARD PAINTER: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: During his run
for the White
House, president-elect Donald
Trump made Mexico,
perhaps more than any other
individual country,
a campaign issue.
Tonight, with the help of the
Pulitzer Center
on Crisis Reporting, we begin a
special two-part
series from Mexico, and a look
at Trump's
promises to deport millions of
undocumented
immigrants and to build a wall
along the U.S.
Southern border.
Special correspondent Nick
Schifrin and producer
Zach Fannin begin their report
tonight from
the outskirts of the Mexican
border city of
Ciudad Juarez.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In the dry
riverbed that separates
Mexico from the U.S., the
promise of a better
life is only a few hundred feet
away.
The woman is a 23-year-old
Mexican from Juarez
who asked to remain anonymous.
Leading her is a
half-guide/half-smuggler
known as a coyote.
Everything beyond the fence is
El Paso, Texas.
She's trying to cross illegally.
WOMAN (through translator):
There's work here,
but the wages are very low.
You can barely survive here.
Life there is better than here.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The coyote's been
doing this
for 10 years.
Compared to when he started,
today's border
is much more secure.
MAN (through translator): It's
more difficult
now.
Before, they used to cross just
to have fun.
Now they cross because they want
to be there,
like her, and live there.
NICK SCHIFRIN: She's part of a
recent spike.
From August to October, the
number of people
apprehended on the Southern
border rose by
nearly 20 percent.
She's trying to get in before
Donald Trump
is inaugurated.
WOMAN (through translator): They
say it will
get more difficult, so I have to
do it now.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What would happen
if President
Trump built a wall right here?
MAN (through translator): We
would cross anyway.
We're never going to stop
crossing.
NICK SCHIFRIN: How would you
cross if there
were a wall there?
MAN (through translator): That's
what we wondered
when the fence went up.
And we found a way.
Here we are.
There's always a way.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It's not easy.
Tonight, a border guard scared
them away.
They will try again tomorrow.
Stopping this kind of illegal
immigration
was a central Trump campaign
theme.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: When Mexico
sends its people, they're not
sending their
best.
They're bringing drugs.
They're bringing crime.
They're rapists.
And some, I assume, are good
people.
On day one, we will begin
working on an impenetrable,
physical, tall, powerful,
beautiful Southern
border wall.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
NICK SCHIFRIN: The Mexico-U.S.
border is nearly
2,000 miles' long.
Right now, walls or fences, like
this one
west of El Paso, Texas, cover
about 700 miles.
The terrain can be rough.
But the distances between
American and Mexican
cities are often small.
In some places, sturdy iron
gives way to standard-issue
chain-link fence, which is
scheduled to be
replaced.
This fence couldn't keep this
young man out.
U.S. border agents arrest a
17-year-old Mexican
who crossed illegally.
He's been arrested before trying
to lead undocumented
immigrants into the U.S.
This time, he was spotted by a
highly sensitive
camera manned by an agent more
than a mile
away.
JOE ROMERO, Border Patrol: They
have got nighttime
equipment, cameras they can use
to look down
and really cover a vast area
with the technology
they have available to them.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Joe Romero is a
supervisory
Border Patrol agent.
He says there is no quick and
easy solution
to securing the border.
JOE ROMERO: Here, we have got an
18-foot fence.
There's a guy in Mexico, I'm
sure, making
a killing off of 20-foot
ladders.
At the end of the day, people
find a way to
get through.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Every day, they
patrol for
eight hours.
The vehicles and fences are
meant to deter
and stop would-be crossers.
This increased presence, along
with more aggressive
prosecution, began a decade ago.
It worked.
Illegal crossings are down 84
percent since
2006, despite the recent spike.
Is the goal to bring illegal
crossings to
zero?
JOE ROMERO: I can't say that you
will ever
be able to stop crossings 100
percent.
I just don't see that.
And, really, that's not the
goal.
The goal is to mitigate the
threats coming
to our borders.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Truly separating
these countries
is nearly impossible, given
their deep connections,
not only geographic -- I'm
standing in the
U.S., and everything beyond the
water is Mexico
-- but also intertwined
economies and families
who straddle the border.
Every day, more than a million
people cross
legally.
The Olivares Castro family's
commute starts
every day at 4:00 a.m.
Mother Reina, behind the wheel,
is a Mexican
from Juarez; 12-year-old Anna
wants to be
a doctor when she grows up.
To cross the border, she needs a
binder full
of papers and a student visa.
About 370,000 vehicles cross the
Southern
border every day.
The wait can be more than an
hour, all of
this, so Anna can go to an
American school
that's better than any school in
Juarez.
ANNA OLIVARES CASTRO, Student:
They teach
you more things.
They get more deep into the
subjects they
teach you.
I have more job opportunities.
They recognize your talent.
NICK SCHIFRIN: She says this
private school
treats her with respect.
This family and many Mexicans
believe that
president-elect Trump
disrespects a country
of 120 million.
REINA OLIVARES CASTRO, Mother
(translated):
Not everyone is a criminal.
They need us Mexicans, they need
us Latinos,
and we need them.
ANNA OLIVARES CASTRO: He's
telling lies.
And all those people think that
we're what
Donald Trump says.
But we're not like that.
We're good people.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Two thousand
three hundreds
miles north, the Latino
community in Columbus,
Ohio, feels the same frustration
and fear.
JOHN RAMOS, LULAC: Here in the
Midwest, in
Ohio, now all Latinos seems to
fit a profile.
NICK SCHIFRIN: John Ramos heads
the local
office of the pro-Latino rights
organization
LULAC.
He is most concerned by Trump's
promise to
deport millions of undocumented
workers.
DONALD TRUMP: I am going to
create a new special
deportation task force focused
on identifying
and quickly removing the most
dangerous criminal
illegal immigrants in America
who have evaded
justice.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That promise
seems to have
awakened previously hidden
racism and nationalism.
This undocumented Mexican
immigrant, who was
too scared to show her face,
gave birth nine
months ago in Ohio.
That means the daughter's a U.S.
citizen,
and the U.S. is obligated to
provide her Social
Security.
But when the mother tried to get
her baby
a Social Security card, a local
official threw
her out of the office.
WOMAN (through translator): He
told me: "I
can't help you.
Get out of here."
And his voice was upset.
I told him: "It's not Social
Security for
me.
It's for her."
And he told me: "You don't have
documents.
How dare you come here?"
NICK SCHIFRIN: Is that a federal
official
effectively going rogue?
JOHN RAMOS: I would say so.
It's not in his position as a
Social Security
employee, federal employee, to
request a person
to show proof of their
citizenship.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The mother
returned with a
lawyer, and the government
official gave the
baby the Social Security card.
But he improperly forced the
mother to provide
her address.
Ramos says that's never happened
before.
JOHN RAMOS: If you have to
provide right now
your residence, your point of
contact, your
phone number, you're providing a
track, a
documentation to follow up on
you.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And that has sent
a chill into
Columbus' Latino community.
JOHN RAMOS: It's all the hate.
It's all these comments that he
would say
about, like, "Oh, I would just
punch him in
the face."
DONALD TRUMP: Like to punch him
in the face,
I will tell you.
JOHN RAMOS: So you would have
people now thinking
that they could probably come up
to you and
just act on their own and attack
you.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The day after
Donald Trump
was elected president, something
happened
to you at school.
Tell me what happened.
GIRL: This kid was making fun of
me at school.
And he was like: "Are you going
to go pack
your bags?
Are you going to go back to
Mexico?
Are your parents getting ready?"
and all that.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The 9-year-old
girl is an American,
born in Ohio, and goes to a
local public school.
Her father is an undocumented
Mexican who
has been here for 11 years.
They're also scared and didn't
want us to
identify them.
He runs a taco truck.
He pays taxes on relatively
steady income.
His customers are mostly fellow
undocumented
immigrants.
They have always felt welcomed,
he says, until
Donald Trump began his campaign.
MAN (through translator): Inside
the Mexican
communities, people go to work
with fear.
And the kids' grades can go down
because they're
worrying about what's going to
happen.
The impact has been like a bomb.
It's affecting the children, the
young people,
the innocents.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In response to
those fears,
Mexican Foreign Secretary
Claudia Ruiz Massieu
released a video featuring
Mexico's consul
generals.
They urge the five-plus million
undocumented
Mexicans in the U.S. to stay
calm.
CLAUDIA RUIZ MASSIEU, Mexican
Foreign Secretary:
We are alert.
That is why I have instructed my
50 consulates
to increase their outreach to
our community.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Massieu says she
wants to work
with the incoming
administration, but she
warns that if Trump follows
through on all
his promises, it's not only
Mexico that would
be harmed.
CLAUDIA RUIZ MASSIEU: If the
environment were
to become more hostile, I'm sure
the United
States would also feel a
negative effect in
its economy, in prices,
inflation, in loss
of jobs, and in loss of people
that really
contribute a lot to different
communities
throughout the United States.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But even before
Trump's taken
office, illegal immigration has
risen, as
has the panic among Mexicans on
both sides
of the border.
For the "PBS NewsHour" I'm Nick
Schifrin in
Ciudad Juarez, Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
David Brooks
and others on how to keep the
peace during
your family's Thanksgiving meal;
and the final
turkey pardon under President
Obama.
Now: trying to reverse
radicalization and
terrorism in the U.S.
Miles O'Brien looks at how
experts in the
field of clinical psychology are
tackling
this, as part of our weekly
story on the Leading
Edge of science.
MILES O'BRIEN: In a federal
courtroom in Minneapolis,
they are facing the threat of
homegrown terrorism
in a manner that has never been
tried before
in this country.
It is a bold experiment in
criminal justice
and clinical psychology.
The question?
Can aggressive counseling bring
someone back
from the brink of
radicalization?
MANNY ATWAL, Federal Public
Defender: What
we have started here is
revolutionary.
I think it's great.
MILES O'BRIEN: Manny Atwal is a
federal public
defender representing
20-year-old Abdullahi
Yusuf.
He is one of eight
first-generation Somali
Americans, all in their teens or
early 20s,
convicted in May of plotting to
go to Syria
and fight for the Islamic State.
MANNY ATWAL: I know we punish
juveniles.
I get that, and I understand
that.
And I know we punish young
adults, and I get
that and understand that.
But, at the same time, to say
let's just lock
them up for a lifetime is not
the right solution.
MILES O'BRIEN: While he was in
jail awaiting
sentencing, Abdullahi Yusuf
became the nation's
first convicted terrorist to
undergo terrorism
rehabilitation.
He has two mentors who counsel
him regularly
and a wide-ranging reading list.
MANNY ATWAL: He will have like a
week to read
this, write up a book report and
then discuss
it with us.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, it's a real
assignment
for him?
MANNY ATWAL: Yes.
Yes.
Learning American civics,
learning about American
culture, learning about the East
and West
just -- it just opened up his
eyes.
And that, I think, is the
disengagement that
I speak of, to try and get these
kids to disengage
from some of their thinking
that's been put
in their heads, and to get them
back to be
good citizens that they were
before this all
happened.
MILES O'BRIEN: It appears the
effort might
have held sway with the judge.
Yusuf, who also testified
against his friends,
was sentenced to time served.
Most of the others received long
prison terms.
The case of these men is one
chapter in a
long, sad story.
JOHN TUNHEIM, Chief U.S.
District Judge, District
of Minnesota: Minnesota has the
greatest number
of terrorism prosecutions of any
of the federal
districts in the United States.
MILES O'BRIEN: John Tunheim is
the chief federal
judge for the District of
Minnesota, home
to the largest Somali American
community in
the U.S.
He watched from the bench as a
tragic exodus
began in 2007; 23 young Somali
Americans from
Minnesota joined the ranks of
the al-Qaida-linked
Al-Shabaab terror group as it
tried to topple
the government of Somalia.
More recently, the call to arms
has come from
the Islamic State.
For judges trying to mete out
fair sentences,
it is uncharted territory.
There are no guidelines.
JOHN TUNHEIM: They're different
from a bank
robber or someone who sells
drugs.
I mean, we understand those
cases.
We have had many of those cases
in our courts.
We haven't had many terrorism
cases.
We need to understand them.
We need to make sure that we can
keep them,
to the best effort that we
possibly can, from
becoming terrorists again.
MILES O'BRIEN: For some expert
advice, they
turned to this man in Stuttgart,
Germany.
DANIEL KOEHLER, German Institute
on Radicalization
and De-radicalization: The
Minneapolis group
was a by-the-book radicalization
process.
What they did was, they actually
followed
ISIL's own recruitment handbook
step-by-step.
MILES O'BRIEN: Daniel Koehler is
one of a
small cohort of experts in the
world in the
emerging field of
de-radicalization.
The judge hearing the cases in
Minnesota is
factoring Koehler's guidance
into sentencing.
DANIEL KOEHLER: When you start
working with
a person, the first question is,
is that person
willing to change?
Is he or she actually asking for
help to leave
the movement?
Is there any cognitive opening?
It's like peeling an onion.
Layer by layer, you try to work
yourself to
the core and offer something
that gets more
and more attractive to that
person, to compete
with a narrative of groups like
ISIL or al-Qaida.
MILES O'BRIEN: Koehler has
de-radicalized
neo-Nazis for years, and he says
the approach
is much the same, but the
enticement to religious
extremism is even more
compelling.
ARIE KRUGLANSKI, Psychologist,
University
of Maryland: It's the
opportunity to become
a hero, to become a martyr, to
serve a cause
greater than your own.
MILES O'BRIEN: Psychologist Arie
Kruglanski
says terrorists are seeking that
and certainty,
clear-cut answers in a chaotic
world.
The psychological term is
cognitive closure.
ARIE KRUGLANSKI: The need for
cognitive closure
is the need for certainty and
the need to
be confident about a topic, the
need to know
for sure.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kruglanski and
his team have
authored reams of research on
the Sri Lankan
terror group known as the
Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam, the Tamil
Tigers.
He discovered a clear link
between feelings
of self-worth and the desire to
join a group.
ARIE KRUGLANSKI: You feel that
you're humiliated,
that you're insignificant, you
do not matter.
And that predisposes people to
listen to ideologies
that tell you, I will tell you
how you're
going to matter.
You're going to matter -- and
this is in the
case of ISIS and radicalization
-- you're
going to matter by joining the
fight.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kruglanski has
tested this
theory with a simple experiment,
which he
replicated for us.
Our subjects, four University of
Maryland
undergraduates.
Graduate student Marina
Chernikova presided
over the experiment.
MARINA CHERNIKOVA, University of
Maryland
Graduate Student: The purpose of
this experiment
is to provide -- is to explore
the evolutionary
hunting hypothesis.
MILES O'BRIEN: They all played a
simple video
game called the Duck Hunt.
The game was set to be
impossibly hard for
two of them, and incredibly easy
for the other
two.
They were told a score of 100 or
more predicts
all kinds of success in life.
MARINA CHERNIKOVA: But scores
lower than 100
strongly predict failure.
So you're going to be playing
that game today.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ben Weinberg (ph)
had it easy.
He was knocking ducks out of the
sky right
and left, and waltzed to the
100-point threshold.
But when it was Mara Lins' turn
in the hot
seat, there were no sitting
ducks, not even
close.
MARA LINS, University of
Maryland Student:
I felt really frustrated,
because the duck
was just going so fast, I
couldn't ever really
click on it that well, and the
scores just
kept going more and more down.
So, it made me really
uncomfortable, actually.
MILES O'BRIEN: They took a
survey that included
two dozen questions designed to
assess people's
need for support from a group.
ARIE KRUGLANSKI: So, this person
seems to
be scoring very high on
interdependence.
Do you know what condition was
he in?
MARINA CHERNIKOVA: Yes, this one
was in the
failure condition.
ARIE KRUGLANSKI: In the failure
condition.
OK.
That's very interesting.
If you're successful, you feel
relatively
independent of your group.
You can have it on your own.
You do not need the group.
You do not need other people.
But when you feel humiliated and
weakened
in a sense of failure, that's
the circumstances
that lead you to attach to the
group, to the
larger entity that would empower
you and tell
you how to feel significant by
doing what
the group requires you to do.
MILES O'BRIEN: The Minnesota men
were straddling
two cultures, not sure where
they belonged,
and they were incessantly
watching ISIS recruitment
videos.
MANNY ATWAL: I don't mean to
sound so callous
about it, but it looked cool to
them.
I don't think, personally, these
kids ever
thought through it, I'm going to
be actually
picking up a gun and killing
people.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ayan Farah runs a
small restaurant
in a mall that caters to the
Somali community.
Her son Adnan is one of the
convicted terrorists.
He got a 10-year sentence.
She does not believe prison is
warranted.
AYAN FARAH, Mother: He's a
teenage.
Teenage?
He is a teenage.
Always teenage is a teenage.
MILES O'BRIEN: But does
de-radicalization
work?
Arie Kruglanski has data that
shows it does.
In Sri Lanka, he studied the
Tamil Tigers
at different times during their
first year
home after a long civil war.
Some were exposed to a full
de-radicalization
program.
Others were not.
ARIE KRUGLANSKI: We found a
significant decline
in violence in the experimental
group that
received the treatment, as
compared to the
control group that received only
minimal treatment.
Human minds, human psyches are
malleable.
They are pliable.
In the same way as a person gets
radicalized,
it changes from a mainstream
kind of person
to a fringe kind of person, they
can be brought
back, and also they can be
re-radicalized.
MILES O'BRIEN: The experiment
may soon have
some other points of data,
thanks some judges
in Minnesota who are leaning
forward, looking
for a better solution.
JOHN TUNHEIM: While people may
be very happy
to see someone put away for
many, many years,
if they're accused of being a
terrorist, that
just is not feasible to think
that warehousing
these people without helping
them at all is
doing anyone any good.
MILES O'BRIEN: The science
suggests de-radicalization
is possible, but is this country
ready to
embrace the approach en masse?
The jury is still out on that.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Minneapolis.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As families and
friends gather
together for this Thanksgiving
holiday, we
are aware that this year's meal
may be a more
tense and awkward affair than
usual because
of reaction to the election.
In that spirit, we collected a
number of voices,
some from the "NewsHour" family,
to offer
suggestions about how we can
talk to each
other this year, with civility,
sometimes
with candor, sometimes with
humor, and understanding
too.
JOSE ANTONIO VARGAS, Journalist:
I'm looking
forward to what I'm sure will be
an uncomfortable,
but celebratory Thanksgiving.
DAVID BROOKS: I recommend not
talking about
politics right away, but having
several earlier
rounds of conversations.
So, the first subject could be
things I have
always resented about you.
And the next subject could be
ways you have
wounded me from which I will
never recover.
And then, by the time you get to
politics,
it will seem pretty good,
actually.
STEVE DEACE, Radio Talk Show
Host: I think
civil is not a tone.
It's a temperament.
If somebody says to you, hey, I
think you're
knuckle-dragging pond scum with
a smile on
their face, I don't feel better
because they
said it nice.
I think civility is the
motivation.
RUTH MARCUS, Columnist, The
Washington Post:
In the middle of a discussion,
if another
course is coming or another
piece of pie is
to be had, you might want to try
that.
KALI HOLLOWAY, Senior Writer,
Alternet: This
is never an easy conversation
even in the
best of times, right, which is
why we're notoriously
bad at having it.
RUTH MARCUS: There is always
changing the
subject.
I understand a lot of people
like to talk
about sports.
JOSE ANTONIO VARGAS: We gamble.
We play poker.
It's a Filipino game called
Pusoy.
It's like a Filipino poker.
So at least we're gambling while
this is happening.
So, it adds levity.
SUSAN DAVID, Harvard Medical
School: Nine
times out of 10, we find
ourselves saying
the very thing that we promised
that we wouldn't
say, and then you have got a
turkey explosion
on your hands.
RUTH MARCUS: My solution to that
is going
to be, like I said, just give
them pie.
JOSE ANTONIO VARGAS: I don't
think we as a
country know how to have
conversations anymore.
(LAUGHTER)
JOSE ANTONIO VARGAS: I think
what happens
is, we all just project.
And, instead of listening, like
really listening,
what we do is, when people talk,
we already
decide how we're going to
counter what they're
saying.
DAVID BROOKS: I have never lost
a friend over
politics, and I don't believe in
it.
Politics is something we care
about, but friendship
matters more.
Family relationship matters a
zillion times
more.
KALI HOLLOWAY: These
conversations have to
start with the sense that you
are going to
moderate your own behavior,
you're going to
listen to what the other person
is saying.
Form a bond with the person that
you're talking
to.
JOSE ANTONIO VARGAS: Listening
is a radical
act.
And I could not agree more.
And I think, more than anything,
we need to
listen to each other.
KALI HOLLOWAY: When things get
do heated,
I think doing what you can to
allow that person
the space to really speak to who
they are,
the values that drive them, and
not so they
can feel demonized or that they
have to be
defensive.
STEVE DEACE: I can get worked up
sometimes.
And when I can sense that I'm
about to go
over the line, I will just say
something really
dumb or make a really trivial
pop culture
reference that's just beyond
silly just to
sort of pop the pin and let some
air out of
the room a little bit.
SUSAN DAVID: There's a lot of
research that
shows that, when we don't just
say I'm angry
or I'm sad, but I feel betrayed,
I feel really
sad, when we can get more
nuanced about our
emotions, we tend to do better
in these interactions.
JOSE ANTONIO VARGAS: Everyone in
my family,
either -- most of whom are
either born here
and are U.S. citizens or
naturalized U.S.
citizens.
Everyone is kind of panicking
and worried.
Some of my family members,
including my grandmother,
thinks I should just go home,
home being the
Philippines, where I haven't
been since I
was 12.
Everybody is going to have
something to say,
because that's what family is,
and just to
kind of nod and smile and, you
know, explain,
this is my home, and no
president can take
that away.
KALI HOLLOWAY: I would encourage
particularly
white people to go home and have
these difficult
conversations.
Don't just have them in your
echo chambers
or when you're around other
progressive whites.
You need to take some of those
important points
home and point out why these
issues are important
to you.
Maybe talk about why it's
personal, talk about
friendships that you have with
people of color
or people who are genuinely
afraid and who
have been affected by this.
STEVE DEACE: I don't think
anybody should
feel like they have some
obligation to address
these things at the Thanksgiving
table.
That's not what Thanksgiving is
about.
It's not about you.
It's not about -- that's -- I
think people
are confusing Thanksgiving with
Festivus.
All right?
This is not about the airing of
grievances.
This is not about
self-actualization or
understanding
of your viewpoint.
RUTH MARCUS: Whether you
supported Hillary
Clinton, whether you supported
Donald Trump,
whether you're a Democrat or a
Republican
-- and I don't mean to sound too
saccharin
here, but we are all Americans.
We are celebrating a national
holiday that
should make us all stop and be
at least a
little bit thankful that we live
in this country.
DAVID BROOKS: I would just
remember that the
people who voted for Trump, if
you're not
a Trump voter, in my experience
-- I have
certainly spoken to a lot of
them -- they
were realistic about the guy,
and they just
wanted a change.
They wanted to be heard.
They had sometimes legitimate
reasons for
voting for a person who I
personally disagree
with.
But -- so it's not like they
were signing
on for evil.
They were taking the vehicle
they had to change
what they saw as a declining
circumstance.
SUSAN DAVID: Instead of feeling
that this
individual is defined by one
vote or one perspective,
we can instead bring our values,
our intention,
our compassion, our love, our
kindness to
people who we truly value.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On our Web site,
you can download
our guide to civility at the
holidays and
use it as a place mat at the
Thanksgiving
table, seriously.
Find it at PBS.org/NewsHour.
turkey pardons
JUDY WOODRUFF: Before the
president and his
family gather for Thanksgiving,
today, he
made time for an executive duty:
his final
pardoning of the turkey as
commander in chief.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Hey!
JUDY WOODRUFF: The annual
tradition sees two
lucky birds spared from the
dinner table,
but only one is selected to take
part in the
ceremony.
BARACK OBAMA: Malia and Sasha,
by the way,
are thankful that this is my
last presidential
turkey pardon.
What I haven't told them yet is
that we are
going to do this every year from
now on.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: No cameras, just
us, every year.
No way I am cutting this habit
cold turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The tradition has
happened
every November for the past
quarter-century.
But there's debate about how it
all got started.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United
States: President Truman was the
first president
to pardon a turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that's not
true.
In fact, the Truman Presidential
Library says,
Truman sometimes indicated to
reporters that
the turkeys he received were
destined for
the family dinner table.
Truman was actually the first
president to
receive a turkey from the
National Turkey
Federation.
So, who was the first president
to pardon
a turkey?
Lincoln, it appears, was the
first on record.
But it was a Christmas turkey
that his son
had taken a liking to.
President John F. Kennedy was
the first to
pardon a Thanksgiving turkey.
In 1963, despite a sign hanging
around the
turkey's neck that read, "Good
eating, Mr.
President," Kennedy sent the
bird back to
the farm.
Richard Nixon also gave the
birds a reprieve,
sending his turkeys to a nearby
petting zoo.
Ronald Reagan was the first to
use the word
pardon when he was talking
turkey in 1987.
The turkey pardoning became
formalized in
1989, with President George H.W.
Bush.
GEORGE H.W.
BUSH, Former President of the
United States:
Let me assure you, and this fine
tom turkey,
that he will not end up on
anyone's dinner
table, not this guy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This year, the
spared birds
will be sent to Virginia Tech
University,
where they already have a
prominent gobbler
mascot on campus.
The event has become a White
House holiday
tradition.
BILL CLINTON: This is the eighth
I have had
the privilege to meet and set
free in the
Rose Garden.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In 2000, Jerry
the turkey from
Wisconsin sported a White House
pass around
his neck.
Four years later, the Bush
administration
also had some with fun with the
event.
The names of that year's turkeys
were chosen
in a vote on the White House Web
site.
GEORGE W. BUSH, Former President
of the United
States: This is an election
year, and Biscuits
had to earn his spot at the
White House.
Biscuits and his running mate,
Gravy, prevailed
over the ticket of Patience and
Fortitude.
BARACK OBAMA: I hereby pardon
you from the
Thanksgiving table.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For his final
turkey pardon
naming, President Obama took
suggestions from
the Iowa turkey producers'
children and their
classmates.
The winners?
Tater and Tot.
Tonight on PBS: two
documentaries commemorating
the 75th anniversary of the
attack on Pearl
Harbor.
"USS Oklahoma: The Final Story"
features first-person
accounts from survivors who
spent days trying
to rescue trapped sailors, and
it focuses
on new efforts to identify those
who perished.
And "Into the Arizona" follows a
team of divers
who were the first to explore
the lower decks
of the ship where more than
1,000 sailors
lost their lives.
NARRATOR: In 1941, the attack on
Pearl Harbor
claimed the mighty warship USS
Arizona.
Now, 75 years later, one Arizona
survivor
and a group of scientists take a
look at the
ship like it has never been seen
before.
MAN: The Oklahoma was going over
very fast,
and everybody kind of was for
himself to get
out.
WOMAN: Pearl Harbor is an event
that reaches
the 20th century into the 21st
century.
I know my family never had
closure for generations.
MAN: The ability to identify
remains is really
advanced, so there's a lot of
hope for the
families who lost loved ones.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The two Pearl
Harbor films
air tonight on most PBS
stations.
And, finally tonight, we want to
take a moment
to thank you, our viewers, who
have liked
us on Facebook and helped us
reach a milestone.
Thank you for that.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: a look at the
nation's top restaurants
over time that have influenced
what we eat.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," have
a wonderful Thanksgiving.
Thank you, and good night.